---
title: "Notes on My Depression"
categories: ["Personal"]
date: 2022-12-17T16:00:00Z
lastmod: 2022-12-04T16:00:00Z
description: ""
featured_image: ""
draft: true
---
I suffer from depression. That's a statement of fact.  From the time I was an adolescent until my late twenties, I struggled with it. A few years ago, I started my journey from acceptance, insight, psychotherapy and medication to become a functional human being. These days, after weaning of the medication, I'm being confronted again with that dark part of myself, forcing me to think about what it means to me, what it did to me in the past or how I will go forward from where I am now. This is the first time writing down some of these things from the past, a lot of the memories are distorted, both by the passing of time as by the depression itself.
<!--more-->
## Dysthemia
For years, I thought about myself as having a low baseline for hapiness. It was just how I was wired, I thought; whereas most people scored like a five or six out of ten on normal days, I averaged maybe four. But I still had good moments, had fun now and then, even experienced long sought-after love.
But those were good times in the sense that I was still a university student, there was a lot of time and space for a social life, almost no expectations besides scoring enough passing grades to continue muddling through my courses. While I really liked that time of my life for everything that did happen, it hurts to think about how different it could've been, had I had a better grasp of my mental state in those days.
I learned later that these are telltale signs of dysthemia - also known these days as persistent depressive disorder. Long term depressive symptoms, but usually not as bad and debilitating as a major depressive episode. I could function, get out of bed, have a seemingly normal social life, but those things made it more difficult to recognize that I was struggling mentally with myself.

## Therapy
After I graduated I was a bit lost, unmoored. Unemployment was horrible: my inner voice was a constant barrage against myself, because unemployment has no working hours outside of which I could feel at ease. I sank deeper with each passing day. I recall being on a festival with friends and feeling overwhelming despair at it all, generally but also at the fact that I knew that it was something I would usually enjoy. It was my very first  encounter with anhedonia - the inability to experience joy from something. I started to retreat more from activities. Why bother when you're not going to have any fun anyway and maybe ruin it for the other people there? It would come and go from that day onward. I also decided around this time to stop dating, since I felt I couldn't deal with it, nor did I feel like I was worth it.
One day, I read a call for subject for research on depression and psychotherapy and I recognized myself in its description. I volunteered, not even sure I was sufficiently depressed, but I figured that the researchers, being psychologists, would be the judge of that. After the multiple in-take sessions they confirmed I could partake in the research. I can't overstate how important this was to me: professionals judged that I indeed suffered from depression. I had an external, professional diagnosis. They saw through all the attempts of mental self-sabotage and gave me, tacitly, the permission to accept that I had (have) a mental health problem.
Through the study, I could go to therapy at a reduced price, which really lowered the bar. The therapist worked quite well. While I didn't find that the therapy helped me deal with my dysthemia, it did give me ample chance to reflect on what was wrong with me and was, in hindsight, a necessary phase to go through.

## Double Dee
While I was going to therapy and learning more about my depression, I was also still unemployed. I moved back in with my parents, which also meant moving further away from my friends and social life. Despite being aware of the problem and being somewhat open about it to close friends, I kept getting worse. My thoughts kept getting darker, and where suicidal ideation (fantasizing about it) had ben pretty normal to me, it got more serious when concrete ideas about 'this year being the last if nothing changes' started cropping up. 
By now, my therapy sessions with the study-appointed psychologist ended and I started seeing one that would help me get a job, which I identified as my main obstacle to overcoming my depression on my own. Getting a job, a sense of self-worth and an income owuld give me the means of pulling myself from the mental swamp I was in. But I had no success in finding one, it was just a parade of applying for a shitty job I would hope someone would hire me for, getting inevitably rejected and having to recover for the rest of the week, until I felt I could take on another interview. Hopes up, getting smashed, despair, in an endless cycle and no moment of rest.
It was clear I was getting worse over time, but when I started getting intrusive thoughts, I got really scared. I've had involuntary thoughts as far as I can remember, usually just the negative thinking I couldn't shake. But these were something else: they were extremely convincing, adamant and imperative. Where my 'normal' inner voice felt like me talking to myself, this, for the first time in my life, felt like something else, wholly alien to my own thinking, but at the same time originating within me. This was no case of 'hearing voices'. This was a case of 'double depression', where someone who has dysthemia experiences a 'normal' major depressive episode - the one that's easibly recognizable as such.
I think I'm lucky to have been lucid enough to make a doctors appointment that day. I told my doctor (and the intern who happened to be there) what was happening and that I'd really like to wanted to try something more serious: if I could have a referral to a psychiatrist for a medicated approach? He did so without hesitation and got me an appointment within a week.

## Pills
The relationship I had with my psychiatrist has always been mainly practical and not therapeutic at all. That has always suited me fine, especially back in the beginning. I had thought I would've jumped through many hoops on multiple appointments to get what I so desperately wanted to try at the time: antidepressants. There was something really, mentally wrong with me, I recognized that, and I wanted to deal with it medically. I tried the other route, didn't seemed to help, I had nothing to lose. The psychiatrist agreed with me that it was a good idea and without hesitation prescribed me an SSRI. It would honestly change everything for me. The therapist I was still seeing expressed doubt about my choice, but that just confirmed to me my judgement of him as a therapist.
It was the end of april. I remember being extremely nervous about my first few pills, feeling nauseous because of the stress even before I took anything. But the pills themselves didn't make me feel bad. Which is not to say that I didn't experience any side effects, but nothing that stopped me from taking them. Initially, the pills themselves didn't do anything (I was still below the effective dosage) but taking the step gave me some much needed mental space. A retreat from balancing on the edge of the abyss, for now.
It took me around three months to get on the correct level and when I went on a road trip with a friend of mine, the change of scenery gave me the chance to make a mental switch. I started, slowly, to get a grip on my own mental state. I could deal with setbacks somewhat easier, got back into applying for jobs and rejections didn't incapacitate me. At the end of august, I got accepted for a lowly administrative job. In less than half a year, things had changed drastically.

## Normalization
I don't think that antidepressants are a wondrous cure for everyone. Or that you shouldn't go to therapy (as it has been proven to work). It's highly personal, and your mileage may vary of course, but I do think that at least some level of voluntary choice is needed for the best results. Sending someone to therapy or prescribing pills without their assent, will be less effective at least.
That said, it's difficult for me to describe what exactly changed because of the medication. It wasn't a conscious change, but after a while I found myself being able to set aside negative feelings and not be bothered by them for days on end. I realized that this is something that those not suffering from (my type of) depression could do: have something bad happen or just having a negative thought and just let it go. Instead of brooding on it for the rest of the day, if not the rest of the week, I could just... not do that. This was an entirely new experience in my life.
I did lose a lot of my sex drive because of the medication, which is a very common thing. But I deemed the trade-off worthwhile, and what good is a high sex drive when you're too depressed to find people to have sex with anyway? I got sleepy during the day too (although that was not so different from afternoon depression naps), but that went better when I changed the time I took my medication.
I worked for half a year at that first job, moved back to the city in that time and even found another job, one that was a little more in line with what I wanted to do. I started dating again, wihout much luck though. But still, life got a lot better. I survived the year, something did change that year.
Since then, I've always identified myself with depression, even though I didn't really experience it anymore. But I did experience 'normal' life for the first time, which was itself a bit wondrous.

## Weaning off
After five years on medication, where my life became what I viewed as a normal one (starting, finally, to tick some of the boxes society expects you to check), I decided I wanted to slowly wean off and stop the pills. This fit into my long term goal of becoming a healthy person, fixing both my physical ailments (of which I had some), my condition (I was in pretty bad shape) and lastly the antidepressants that functioned as a crutch for my mental state. To borrow a metaphor by Wittgenstein: I wanted to kick down the ladder I used to get up where I was. My psychiatrist, who I discovered could be a bit capricious in her stances, seemed sceptical at first. But she supported my choices to start reducing my dosage and when I asked to keep my doses level when I was unsure about it.
It took me a little over a year this way. In the summer I went below the effective dose and a month later had something of a crisis moment. Some setbacks and a persistent bad feeling for two weeks made me afraid that it was all coming back. But I was also unsure about what exactly was happening: maybe I was overreacting, interpreting too much, seeing causal links where there were none? I decided to give it some time and things seemed to normalize again. I did notice however that I started having trouble sleeping (again), but that was a sacrifice I was willing to make. It's something I could deal with in non-medical way, and being tired now and then shouldn't be a problem when you're not actually depressed.
In the autumn I had my last appointment (for now) with the psychiatrist. She agreed to wean off the medication completely in the course of a month or two and said she would be closing my file until further notice. If I judged it necessary, I could start taking my medication again and I was welcome to come back. There was no judgement on her part about this possibility of starting again or returning.

## Return

What does this return mean? 
